[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gravity-- why
is it important?
In this episode, we explore
the strength and significance
of gravity in our universe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gravity is an
interesting force.
It was first
thought of by Newton
as a force that attracted
things to each other.
It was unclear where
the force came from.
But it was described
by Newton as an effect
related to the ether.
Eventually, Einstein rewrote
the concept of gravity
as the result of
curvature of spacetime--
that is that space and time can
curve to produce an attraction.
But that this attraction is not
component of the object itself,
but of the space around it-- the
curvature of space around it.
Typically, the concept is given
as the surface of a trampoline
or a flexible surface
that would bend
as you put a heavy
ball in the middle,
and then another ball would
appear to be attracted.
I'd rather use the
analogy of a tub
from which you pulled the
plug and have this vortex.
And if you put the rubber
ducky around this vortex,
it would appear to be attracted.
The gravitational force has
been a big problem in physics
because it is not necessarily
well adapted to quantum theory.
How does gravity interact
at the quantum scale?
It is unclear in
the standard model.
And the other forces,
as well, have not
been defined very appropriately.
Meaning that we know
there's gravity,
we know there is
electromagnetic fields,
the strong force,
we know there is
the weak force--
the four forces.
But we don't know
where they come from.
We don't know how
they got there.
We don't know what is the source
energy to produce these forces.
So from the
exploration I did, it
became clear that
gravity was actually
the result of the structure
of space spinning--
not just curving, but spinning.
So that the curvature
is secondary effect
of the spinning of spacetime.
What is important
here is that as I
wrote the equation for
this spinning structure
of the vacuum curving
creating gravity,
it became clear that
gravity is actually
a secondary effect
of this structure
of spacetime spinning.
And that when the spin
gets to a narrow neck,
the gravity can become
very, very strong.
Yet, in our current
understanding of physics,
we think of gravity
as the weakest force.
And this has created a lot of
issues in our capacity to unify
gravity with the other forces.
I think that gravity is
actually the strongest force.
And I'm going to tell you why.
If a mass is large enough,
the gravitational field can be
so strong that even
electromagnetic fields cannot
escape it.
It's called a black hole.
So how can it be
the weakest force?
If you say this to a
physicist he will say,
well, it's only because the
mass density or the energy
density in that region
of space is very high.
Because we make a distinction,
we isolate these things.
We say mass is this,
and gravity is this.
But we've never been able to
measure mass without gravity
as if mass went and created
the gravitational effect,
or that gravity without mass.
And this is what we discovered
in this equation, is
that it's all the same thing.
It's all spacetime spinning--
including mass, energy,
thermodynamics, and so on.
And so there is no distinction.
So all of a sudden
you realize, well,
when the vortex of spacetime--
when the vortex of the vacuum
fluctuation gets tight
enough, then gravity
is extremely strong.
So then I calculated,
if that was true,
how strong gravity would
become when it arrives
at the radius of a proton,
and what would be the energy
level of that proton.
And I found that the proton
would have an energy level
equivalent to a black hole, and
that the gravitational force
of a black hole the
size of the proton
would be exactly
the strong force.
>> The strong nuclear force
is one of the four fundamental
forces in nature.
As its name implies,
the strong force
is the strongest
force of the four.
It's responsible
for binding together
the fundamental
particles of matter
to form larger particles.
The other three are
gravity, electromagnetism,
and the weak force.
>> When we discovered
that force,
we didn't think it was gravity.
We called it the strong force
because we thought that gravity
is too weak to do the job.
In fact, gravity is
the strongest force.
And it is that force that's
holding the protons together.
Because yes, we measured a
mass of the proton as smaller
than the mass of a black hole.
However, the energy
density of the proton
in terms of vacuum
fluctuation shows clearly
that the proton has the
energy of a black hole,
since its gravitational
effect is exactly
the one that would be produced
by a black hole that size--
not approximately, but exactly.
So when you calculate
it, what you get
is exactly the
gravitational coupling
constant, which is the
coupling between gravity
and the strong force.
We see that the strong force is
exactly the strength of gravity
for a black hole proton.
And the energy that makes
the proton a black hole
is the energy of the vacuum
structure spinning inside it.
What we measured when we
measured the mass of the proton
is much smaller
because we measure
only the energy
that's able to emanate
from the surface of the proton.
And my holographic mass solution
demonstrates that very clearly.
All we measure is the
entropy of the proton, not
its fundamental energy state.
So then the strong force is
gravity at the quantum level.
If that's true, then there's
another problem that emerge.
Why is the strong force
such a short range
relative to gravity?
That is, when we scatter
protons away from each other,
they unstick faster
than they would unstick
if gravity was involved.
That is, gravity
has a range that's
the square of the distance,
where the strong force
range drops at an
exponential rate
as you move the protons
apart from each other.
So confinement is much
stronger and drops much faster.
I had to solve this.
And I realized that the solution
had to do with mass dilation.
Mass dilation occurs when
an object is accelerated
near the speed of light.
Just like time changes as you
approach the speed of light,
Einstein discovered
in special relativity
that there is a dilation
of the mass as well as you
approach the speed of light,
so that the mass increases.
So the impact of
the proton spinning
at near the speed of light
on the structure of space
is the strength of the strong
force in terms of gravity.
But when you scatter
the proton, when
you hit it with another
proton or with an electron
and it scatters, it
changes its velocity.
So the mass dilation
drops as you move.
The speed of rotation drops
as you move the proton away
from each other.
As the speed of rotation
drops, the mass drops.
As the mass drops, the
gravitational force drops.
So I calculated how
fast that would all
drop as you move the protons
away from each other.
And I got the exact same
range as the strong force,
but using gravity
in consideration
of special relativity as well,
which implies mass dilation.
So it gave me the correct
range and the correct strength.
This changes the picture.
Because all of a sudden, you
eliminate the strong force,
and you end up with
gravity, electromagnetism,
and a weak force.
But think of what we've learned
so far throughout this series.
We know spacetime is spinning.
We know that when it spins,
we know that it produces what
we call mass across all scales.
We know that it's the result
of all these little particles
spinning together-- the
Plancks, the little particles,
the pieces of information
spinning together
that makes up the mass.
Well, think of those little
spinning pieces of information
the little Plancks
spinning-- billions
of them spinning together
to make a little proton.
Think of it like the smoothie
that you make in the morning
where you put all these
good stuff like the fruits
and vegetables in your blender,
and then you turn it on.
And you can see the little
particles of all the good stuff
you put in there going around
into this vortex dynamic
with the little particle going
from the inside to the outside
and back through the
middle of the blender
in this continuous circulation.
All of the sudden, we start
to realize, wait, gravity--
this curvature in spacetime--
may be the particles falling
in-- like the Planck field,
the flow of this fluid
structure of spacetime falling
into the middle of the system.
And because of centrifugal
forces of the spin,
the little particles
get eventually
gets ejected as well, and out
the middle comes the particle.
And that could be the
electromagnetic fields that
are radiating from this system.
And sure enough, when
we write the equations,
that's exactly what we find.
We find the thermodynamic
radiating field
of the electromagnetic fields
emanating from the structure
of spacetime spinning.
And we've solved this
more fundamentally
even because we were
able to actually use
Brownian motion,
which is the position
and relationship of particles
in a gas that produce
thermodynamic effects and
apply it to the Planck field
like if the Planck field
was a superfluid gas.
When we ran this equation,
we got the holographic mass
solution.
So it actually all worked out.
And so we found the viscosity
of the fluid of spacetime,
and the Brownian motion
and the thermodynamics of it.
And so now we've reduced
it to two forces,
where we have the radiative side
being the centrifugal force--
whether it's at
the quantum level.
At the quantum level,
it's the weak force.
And at the cosmological level,
it's the electromagnetic field
that we experience,
and then the Planck
particles falling back in, which
is the gravitational force that
holds it all together.
All this is the result of the
Planck's field spinning again.
>> In other words, unification
of the forces comes directly
from the Planck vacuum
oscillations becoming coherent
because of spin and producing
the dynamical effect that
in certain cases
looks like gravity,
and in other cases looks like
electromagnetic radiation,
or at certain scales looks like
the strong force or the weak
interaction.
>> And all this emerged from
one set of understanding,
one set of
fundamental principle,
first principles that have to
do with the statistical entropy
of the Planck field-- the
dynamics of the Planck field--
the holographic mass solution.
It's very exciting because
the field of physics
has been divided.
And the forces have been
put in as we measured them
and as we discovered them, but
nothing had been explained--
the mechanics under which
these forces have been created
and have emerged.
So now we end up with
the complete unified view
of these forces.
And when they make and they
interact in very specific
relationship with each
other, and so they
define very specific
boundaries where
these interaction
between the forces
are in the proper relationship.
And when they make
these boundaries,
we can find eventually the
quantization of spacetime
that makes up all of the
scales we see in our universe.
As we get this understanding
of the unification of the four
forces, we realize
that, clearly,
if we know the mechanism
that produced them--
which is the spin of
the Planck field--
we could go in the laboratory
and apply this knowledge
to get remarkable
technology definitely.
And we'll talk about that.
And as we developed our
understanding of these forces,
that means that we may be
able to affect these forces
in our body and
our consciousness
because our consciousness
is a flow of information.
And if this is the fundamental
flow of information
of the universe--
if these forces are the result
of this flow of information
in the universe-- it means that
we should be able to affect it.
So we could learn to increase
the energy level, for instance,
of our body, or interact
with the structure of space
in a way that is nourishing
our body instead of separating
our body from the structure
of space, which would
isolate it and make it ill.
Illness may actually
be the result
of a decoherency of the
information in a region
of space in your body.
If this is true, then you
could, with your consciousness,
recreate a coherency in the
body that was previously
altered or broken.
And this might be actually
why there is a placebo effect.
People talk about placebo
effect as if it's just
part of a statistical
analysis of a data set coming
from a group of experiments.
It's a non-trivial thing that
you can give medicine to one
person, and they get better.
And you can give a sugar
pill to the other person,
telling them it's
medicine that's
going to make them better,
and they get better as well.
For 30 to some 50 in some
cases, percentile of a data set,
the placebo effect
is significant.
How is that happening?
It's like a miracle.
You tell someone that
if they take this pill,
they're not going to have
this illness anymore.
And even though the pill has
nothing to do with the illness,
they get better.
There is, even at
this point, tests
that were made with
the placebo effect
where there was placebo
surgery that was done, where
the surgeons, in some
cases, open the person
and did the surgery and
the person got better.
And in other cases,
they opened the person,
didn't do anything in
their, close the person,
and send them home.
And because the person
thought they had the operation
and that the problem was
fixed, well, then the problem
was fixed.
Some 30% of the people showed
placebo surgery capabilities.
And so this might be the
result of our consciousness,
or our intention,
or beliefs affecting
the information in the
structure of space,
and acting upon the
forces of space and time
so that the region of the body
in which there was decoherency
of the information could
get back into coherency even
in mechanical ways in
which the illness implies
that a mechanical
surgery would have
to be made where the molecules
rearrange themselves to repair
the damage.
So it's remarkable.
And it implies
that not only does
this new understanding
of information
in the structure of space--
in the granular
structure of space--
is something that
can unify physics,
but it can unify
our understanding
of consciousness and information
relative to our existence.
Meaning that our
existence is really
just an extension of these
fundamental physics that
produced the forces,
that produced
mass, that produced entropy,
that produced temperature,
and so on, and that the
end result is one of us.
And the dynamics of
spacetime is actually
very much part of our experience
of awareness and consciousness.
What's important to retain
here is that forces are not
separate from each other.
That forces in the universe are
a flow in certain circumstances
creating this effect,
and other circumstance
creating this effect.
But that they're not separate.
That spacetime, that
flow is into a vortex
produces what we call
mass at the same time
as it produced what
we call gravity.
And that electromagnetic
fields is a result
of these dynamics
occurring in which
there is a force that's pulling
away from the system producing
radiation, and magnetism,
and electromagnetic fields.
So that we understand
that this is one thing.
And that this one thing
is able to produce
effects that appear
separate from each other,
but they're not.
And that we are part of this
unity of this one thing.
And that the ultimate
emergence of our existence
may be the result of these
dynamics at different scales
eventually producing
the advanced dynamics
that we see in a complex
human being with its capacity
to self-reflect or to
have self-awareness.
What's exciting
about understanding
the source of gravity
at a deeper level
is that you realize that it
is part of something much more
advanced and much more unified.
It's not some weird,
odd thing that's
happening in the universe that
we don't quite understand.
But that gravity is
a secondary effect
of the dynamic of space itself.
It's all one thing.
You could think of gravity--
if you were to associate
an emotion to it,
you can think of
gravity as love--
what attracts, what holds
to the centripetal force
of the spin of spacetime,
holding like the mother holding
the hand of the child.
And that gives you an emotional
relationship to gravity.
And I think that's not
only a beautiful metaphor,
but as well that it gives
you a sense of belonging--
a sense of belonging to
something greater than you,
mechanics of spacetime
that you're embedded
in and that you're
participating in at the deepest
level of your existence.
And you start to
sense that you're not
separate from the
universe, that you're
part of this oneness
of the universe.
And that makes you--
in my case, it makes me
feel warm and cozy inside.
We often think of gravity as
something heavy that pulls us
to the center and keeps us stuck
to the surface of a planet,
for instance.
However, really, you
could think of gravity
as the result of a certain
set of information flow.
And you could think that
this information flow can
be directed in any direction.
That is, instead of
the information flow
flowing towards the
center of our planet
and producing this force that
holds us to the surface--
a little bit like Newton
had described it--
you could think of
this information flow
being able to be
directed since it's
coupled to the electromagnetic
field in a different direction.
And that would lead
to a different way
of thinking of mass and energy.
But as well, in
technological development
that could liberate humanity
from the surface of the planet.
So that humanity may enter a
larger gravitational field.
So you can think of
gravitational fields
almost as the field
of information that
holds a certain
set of information
to the surface of a planet, or
a solar system, or a galaxy.
And so going from
one set of gravity
to another set of
gravity would be
like graduating into a
larger set of information--
for instance, graduating
to the set of information
that's the galactic
community set of information.
And as you graduate to the
galactic set of information,
you would develop the technology
that can bring you there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]